Iris Shrunken Image Format version 1 (ISIF-1) specification
-----------------------------------------------------------

ISIF is a very simple format for efficient storage of blockwise rewritable media images, such as HDD images.
Space efficiency is achieved by only storing blocks of data that have been used, with optional discarding of
blocks that are no longer in use. We approach this with the BAT (Block Allocation Table), a table that contains
offsets or pointers to blocks that are actually allocated in the file.

Files in the ISIF format use the .ISIF extension.

Files in the ISIF format are comprised of three core regions, namely the Header, Block Allocation Table and Data region.
A file may additionally contain an extension or metadata region that contains user-defined data.
The data region always comes last and is of variable size.
The BAT region size can be calculated based on the block count and block mode 

The header region is 64 bytes in size, it starts at offset 0 and contains the following fields:

Offset  Size  Value       Description
-------------------------------------
0x0     4     0x49534946  Magic
0x4     4     0x00000001  Version
0x8     8     -           Block count
0x10    4     -           Block size
0x14    2     -           Block mode
0x16    2     -           Block compression
0x18    8     -           BAT region offset
0x20    8     -           Extension region offset
0x28    8     -           Data region offset
0x30    8     -           BAT allocated blocks count
0x38    8     -           Reserved

- Block mode                         Usage
  00 - Uncompressed, 32-bit offsets  Balanced, leaning time efficient
  01 - Uncompressed, 64-bit offsets  Size-intensive, leaning time efficient
  02 - Compressed, 32-bit offsets    Most space efficient
  03 - Compressed, 64-bit offsets    Balanced, leaning space efficient

- Block compression (when block mode is 2 or 3)
  00 - RLE

Following the header is usually the Block Allocation Table, which is a table of either 32 or 64-bit offsets. The size
of which depends on the block mode (it is enough to check bit 0 of the mode to determine the offset size)

Offset32  Offset64  Description
-------------------------------
0x00      0x00      Block 0 allocation state
0x04      0x08      Block 1 allocation state
0x08      0x10      Block 2 allocation state
0x0c      0x18      Block 3 allocation state
...

The allocation state of a block is defined to be 0 if it's unallocated, or an offset into the file if it's allocated.

Data region

The data region contains allocated blocks of data

Offset     Size       Description
---------------------------------
0x00       blocksize  Block A
blocksize  blocksize  Block B
...

Reading a block from the file

In order to read a block from the file we index the BAT to find whether this block is actually allocated in the file
or not, If it is allocated (offset != 0), we seek to (data_region_offset+bat_block_offset) to read the requested
block of data. If the block is otherwise unallocated, we read a blocksize's worth of zeroes.

Writing a block to the file

In order to write a block to the file we first need to determine if data is actually being written to the block.
If the write contains all zeroes then we should either deallocate the corresponding block in case it exists, Otherwise
the write is discarded (no blocks are allocated).

If the write contains data, then we need to determine if the block was already allocated or not, if it was allocated,
we simply seek to the corresponding block in the data region and overwrite its contents. If it wasn't allocated prior
to the write, then we need to allocate a new block by appending the written data to the end of the file and storing
the offset of the new block in the corresponding BAT entry.

Deallocating blocks

The process for deallocating a block is expensive, it entails removing a block from the file and subsequently relocating
all blocks following the deallocated block. In order to do this we first iterate over the blocks following the
soon-to-be-deallocated block, subtracting 1 from each of their BAT entries. Then we remove the block data from the file
and finally we relocate all following blocks one blocksize's worth of bytes backwards. Lastly the BAT and header need to
be updated (BAT entry zeroed, BAT allocated blocks count header field decremented by one).

Implementations may choose to deallocate blocks by simply updating the BAT and header to signal the block was deallocated
without physically removing the data from the file, this greatly improves performance of writes in expense of potentially
wasting storage space.

Optimizations to the processes of writing/reading blocks are left up to the implementation. E.g. an implementation may
queue block deallocations to then commit them at file close time, this would prevent storage waste while keeping
write performance high. Optimizations like these are allowed but not part of the specification.